Right now, I'm sure, I know this one is short, so I shall,
um, pick off.
Thank you Madison. Uh, so, um, obviously
as minister I'm committed to strong oversight for our most,
um, vulnerable children.
Um, and it's essential that we continue
to build trust in the systems that support children
to ensure the systems are accountable,
transparent, and effective.
Um, I do want to, uh, put on record, um, the oversight
of the ARI system,
of which the Independent Children's Monitor is one
of the three agencies.
Um, it's not just about Ari, it's about the eight agencies
that are part of the system.
Um, often that is confused, which is why I want
to put that on record.
Um, members will also be aware
that we have introduced the oversight of the
system legislation Amendment Bill
to strengthen the independence of the Monitor, um,
based on feedback, um, that we received
during consultation in the last, uh, piece of legislation.
And that's honoring our government's promise
to create a truly independent monitoring agency, um,
and responds to public concerns.
We do know that effective oversight requires both
independence and trust,
and the monitor must be a credible, impartial voice valued
by communities and respected as an advisor to government.
Its core role is to ensure
that children in the Ang Tamari system receive the support,
care and outcomes they deserve.
So together the monitor with the children
and Young Persons Commission
and the Ombudsman are building a stronger,
more accountable child welfare system.
Um, in 25, 26,
the monitor will visit communities across the country,
hearing voices, sharing findings,
and shining a light on what's working
and what needs to change.
Um, given our government's commitment
to the monitor being more independent, I am going
to be very careful in any answers I give
and I will very, um, clearly be asking the monitor
to speak more than I will in this part of the hearing.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. That's an important point.
Um, I will Jay
Kilda. Thank you.
Um, I think this one is for you though, given
that statement that you just made then.
Um, so recently we saw the release of
s um, re report on outcomes for Tam Maori, um,
and their AU in the orang system.
First of its kind really damning report.
Um, a lot of alarming findings, um, in that report.
My question to you as the minister is what, like
how will you measure the progress of
those agencies?
Not just but the eight, um, in the system
that you mentioned.
Uh, how will you monitor the progress that they're making
to address the issues
and concerns highlighted in not only that report all
of the other monitors reports,
but this being the most recent one?
And where will that be reported? Uh, for us?
Yeah, so, um, I'm kind
of conscious this is a, the estimates hearing.
So, so part of what the member raises, um, will no doubt,
uh, factor in the Monitors work program going forward.
So once issues are identified, that allows the opportunity
for the monitor to then say, we need
to do a more detailed look at this particular piece.
So I'm gonna leave that for them.
Um, but also you will be aware
that in the changes to the legislation, one
of the additional changes that I have made, um,
against agency advice was to require agencies
to report, um,
on the progress they have made on the recommendations.
Because like you, I have been concerned when recommend,
well not necessarily when recommendations have been made,
but when issues have been identified
and insufficient action has been taken.
Um, so that's why that late change in the legislation,
um, which hopefully will pass today has been included
because I don't think it is good enough when
any part of the oversight system, including the monitor
raises serious
and significant issues that action's not taken on
And supplementary to that.
Um, so in terms of the money that has been appropriated for,
to be able to undertake those functions, do that additional,
uh, task that you are asking, is that sufficient
for them to do that?
Um, and is it them that will be reporting on the progress
that all of those agencies are making?
Or like who will be doing that?
Where will that be
and um, timeliness in terms of that
reporting on progress? Yeah,
So I'm gonna, I'm gonna let you answer that
and then if there's anything I'll add it.
So in relation to our first baseline report,
we included a number of outcomes indicators
for the current population
and 27
to 30 year olds from 2022 from the Social Investment Agency.
The purpose, um, of using those indicators was
so we could go back and measure change across the system.
So every year we will be doing our outcomes for Maori report
and we will be using those indicators and others as we grow.
We also put PO into our report,
which are two things which we will go back
and always measure, which is
around intergenerational system change
and also that uhhi who go
through the system have the same aspirations
as all other in New Zealand.
So we are keen to see that actually their,
their situation improves,
but we will always be looking at their outcomes including
health education, mortality,
right across all of those agencies.
And we will go back, we also have our System three yearly
system report, which we published in 2027,
which will be across all of the agencies in the system.
And one final supplementary on that one, uh,
In addition to what you have identified in your report
that you'll use Measure, um, it just concerns me that while
we have that report
and it's findings, we've had the removal
of section seven aa, we've had the removal
of the targets about children going into car of whanau
and the removal of the targets for, um, the proportion
of investment into Maori providers.
That's something that is mentioned, um, in your report.
Mm-hmm. Will you be looking at the things, additional things
that are being done
and the impact that that has on this, like connections
between that you mentioned customer social service providers
as well, so that we can see the things
that may be contributing to better
or worse outcomes in response
to what's identified in your report?
Yes. So, um, looking at the funding
and contracting, for example,
what we put in the report was an increase in funding
to Iwi and Maori services.
TKI is committed to increasing the amount of funding
that goes to Iwi Maori.
So we will be monitoring that.
And while seven AA has been repealed,
our legislation still mandates us to look at outcomes
for TAM Maori.
So we will continuously look at any policy
or legislation changes
that impact on service delivery to them.
Um, we are, the legislation is enabling enough
that we can get data from those agencies.
That's our first port of call is to look at agency data.
We access the social investment agency
to get other indicators.
We've worked with strategic partners, um, our Maori
strategic partners to see what do they want measured
and we will continue to engage with them
to see what's important for them to be measured.
Can I just see one, oh, I Supple mention.
I've got clarification. Alright.
I sorry. It needs be quick.
Yep. So you, um, said that they've increased funding
to Maori providers,
but she's removed the target to increased funding
to a certain percentage to Maori providers.
I,
So what are Tam in their response
and talk about the devolution of services
and the funding shift from, um, some agencies to Iwi Maori.
So we will be monitoring that
The supplementary, what comments you made there about your
powers to get, uh, information from those eight agencies.
Can you just tell us a little bit more about
That? So in our legislation,
we have the ability to ask
for information from agencies, government agencies,
community agencies who are working with Tam Tahi No to Auki,
to provide us with information to inform our reports. So
Does that include those, um, those organizations that are,
uh, empowered or, or funded to do work?
Yes. Yes. Delegated
or contracted to Auki through the act. Thank
You. Thank
you. And we welcome the minister's changes
to the oversight of Ang Systems Act, um,
which now requires the agencies to make this commitments
to implement changes following.
So for example, the A tamari reports,
but the amendment bill currently
before the house, um, adds reporting timeframes,
which isn't reflected in the success matrix tied
to the appropriation in the budget 25, 26.
So what was the justification for omitting these
critical timeframes in the performance measures
and what does that mean for accountability
and community trust?
Um, are we reviewing our,
because so at the moment we're obviously departmental agency
and the legislation is moving us into an I, so we will have
to review our performance dissertations.
Yeah. And, and, and so when the, when the entity becomes,
um, more independent than it is now,
it will then have a board.
And so the board will be required to look at
what the performance indicators will be.
So, um, tho those things will change when we have an
independent board and that is a significant part of, um,
what we're all trying to achieve in terms
of greater independence.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I, I would expect in terms of one
of my early discussions with the board will be
to ensure there is alignment with timeframes
and I can reassure the member, uh,
that I have been incredibly frustrated
and dissatisfied with what I've seen from performance
of government agencies to date around the response to, um,
some of these critical issues.
Thank you. And so just, just one more supplementary there
in terms of when we do get those new, um, matrixes
for success, how will they, um, be
I guess transparently communicated
to community and to the public?
So we have, um, our annual reports,
our annual report on experiences of care, uh, outcomes
for Maori and obviously our three yearly system reports.
So obviously we, um, include information in there,
but we also provide share backs
to every community that we visit.
And we do that within six to eight weeks of a visit.
And that incorporates all of the voices
that we've heard in that community.
So from community agencies, government departments from
whanau caregivers, and all of the information
that we hear is put in there and published on our website
and we go back to the community to share that back.
And just a supplementary minister, just on the, um,
the funding allocation that's attached to this,
but attached to the, um, great independence
that's currently going through the house upon legislation
probably today, um, just what you were aiming to achieve
with those comments you made about your frustration
with other government COVID agencies.
Yeah, so, so the first thing is
by having a stronger oversight system and,
and independence, it just gives us more ability to,
um, uh, be clear about the expectations.
And with that additional reporting requirement
of government agencies, it's
by including it in the legislation.
Uh, we, we don't want to wait to get
to a point too far down the track to realize
that no action's been taken
or insufficient action has been taken
to address the concern that's been raised.
So let me give you a concrete example.
Uh, again, not meant to be going backwards,
but let me just say, so anyway, um, that the Dame Karin
report, uh, that will, we will all be aware of in terms
of the recommendations after the death of, um, Malachi Chu.
Uh, I don't think that government agencies,
and this is not a political statement, government agencies,
uh, have acted fast enough on recommendations
that have come out of that report
and crosses political timeframes.
Uh, but I just think, uh, we have to move faster.
Uh, and there is a, um, there needs
to be a priority on those actions.
And so from the Independent Children's Monitor, part of
what they will do in their forward work program is to assess
progress against the implementation
of those recommendations.
And bluntly, uh, their last report, uh,
we had made insufficient progress.
And can I add minister?
We are in the process of completing our second
report into those recommendations
and we are aiming to have that
published before the end of the year.
Well, thank you. That's the time we've got before.
Uh, thank you for your time.